---
title: On Knowledge and Normativity
tags:
  - constructionism
  - gender
  - nerds
  - rationalism
  - science
  - "social constructionism"
excerpt: "The epistemological differences and cognitive styles may play a bigger role than cultural factors, when it comes to understanding the differences between sciences and humanities."
---

Let us explore some thoughts about the extent to which knowledge about anything is the result of a social negotiation, and consequently, to which degree reality is a social construct. Let me start with embarrassing myself and relate a bit of personal history of social misfortunes.

As a student of philosophy, I found that I ran into a series of conflicts with other students and especially professors. I was not the only one; there were (few) others like me, and we instantly recognized each other by the eye rolling into which we would engage whenever we were told something that seemed to be obviously right to most people in the class, but just as obviously untrue to us. I gradually suspected a divide in epistemology, somewhat but not entirely aligned with our stance towards analytic and continental philosophy, but also an interesting apparent difference in our psychologies that I could not quite put my finger on. Basically, I had fun with analytic professors, especially when we discovered and joyfully explored disagreements, but strangely adversarial engagements with many of the others.

At the time, I put it down to different validity criteria. Computer science (my other main subject) has very simple criteria on what makes a statement valid: the program runs or it does not, the proof checks out or it won't. Everybody is operating at the boundary of what they can intellectually handle, so pretty much every computer scientist is grateful for someone to give a hand where they slipped. Computer science professors tend to be quite gracious to cheeky freshmen that point out a bug in their presentation.

In philosophy, it is harder to tell valid from invalid ideas, and thus, the criteria are much more social. Like John Searle or Jerry Fodor, you are allowed to spout wild nonsense as long as a sufficiently large crowd with the right credentials either likes the implications of your ideas, or your projection of eminence. (Not that there is anything wrong with big thinkers like Searle and Fodor that happen to end up with bad ideas about functionalism or referential semantics: the problem is how an academic _discipline_ arbitrates between ideas.) Whenever I tried to get to the bottom of what seemed to be a really bad idea (for instance, that free will is caused by quantum events in the brain that start causal chains, or that Gödel has discovered something that people can do but computers cannot, or that we can prove that we cannot possibly be a brain in a vat, or that meaning results from intersubjective triangulation of concepts in the external reality, or that you cannot invent a language all by yourself, or that you can express things in graphs that you cannot in principle express in a formal language, or that minds emerge over the interaction between bodies and environment, or that normativity is the root of intentionality and cannot be explained in a reductionist theory), we ran into the polite classroom equivalent of a shouting match that was never resolved in a mutual identification of common ground. It seemed to me as if their statements could be traced back to some glaring fault in one of their premises, from which their defective conclusions necessarily followed, and at the same time, they seemed to be entirely unwilling to temporarily entertain a thought that they did not yet personally believe in.

At this point, you may have already realized with amazement that I managed to get way into my twenties without realizing that pointing out disagreements in socially asymmetric situations requires an investment and potential loss of social capital that I did not possess (i.e. to publicly talk back to an accepted authority, you do not only need to say true and intelligible statements, but be in a position of sufficient relative authority yourself, because otherwise you will not only fail to get your point across, but everybody will hate you). This sad state of affairs is something that I somewhat comprehended on an intellectual level, but not on a behavioral one. Also, I had little intention to behave like this, because it seemed to contradict all values I was ever taught: is it not an ethical imperative to insist on what you believe to be correct by virtue of your rationality, rather than giving in to majority and authority? Is the alternative not succumbing to whatever crazy beliefs the authorities concoct, did we not learn that the atrocities of fascism and Stalinism are direct results of people not questioning the rules that those in power present them with?

It seemed natural to young me that the most important tool for forming knowledge is doubt. Whenever we are presented with an idea, or present an idea to ourselves, we have to thoroughly scrutinize, disassemble and sanitize it before we let it enter our beliefs. Irrationality is infectious; if we adopt irrational or faulty beliefs, the whole edifice of our knowledge may come tumbling down. Learning is a process not of assimilation _by_ the ideas of others, but of disassembling and rebuilding them, based on the logical structure of arguments and facts, with directions of exploration given by innate preferences and innate conclusions. If that leads me into unpopular territory, it simply reinforces that lesson that other people are simply not critical enough, and thus come up with faulty areas of popularity. This view is entirely consistent with the cultural notion of critical intellectualism and the resulting dissidence, as well as the epistemology of positivist science.
I was quite happy that my academic career let me into computer science rather than philosophy, mostly because I got wonderfully and pretty much without exception along with my peers and professors.

Today, I realize that my affliction does not represent a virtue, but must be a mild case of a brain defect, and one that is shared by many practitioners of computer science. From an evolutionary perspective, the most useful opinion forming system should leave you with the most useful opinion, i.e. the opinion of your peers and superiors. If I end up with logically consistent, but unpopular opinions, my opinion forming system might be perfectly suited for doing computer science, but it is still broken. It seems to me as if knowledge is the result of individually encoding observations into a comprehensive construct. Preferences and social norms will bias and distort my ideas, and other people will supply me with comprehensive suggestions for suitable encodings, but I will have do do all the disassembly and integration of their suggestions by myself, the preferences are innate, and the social norms I adopt are the result of innate preferences and the specific norm adaptation mechanisms of my mind.

As it turns out, the brains of [neurotypical](http://positiveaboutautism.co.uk/attachments/Understanding_Neuro_Cornish.pdf) people do an excellent job at aligning themselves with whatever set of opinions dominates their social environment. For a long time, I suspected that these people possess an understanding and an insight into appropriate behavior that I lack. Now I think that it is simply an instinct, which has the unfortunate side-effect of getting in the way of their rationality. Neurotypical people form the majority of the population, and they form their opinions largely due to the influence of their social environment. Their strategy is quite consistent with the idea that knowledge is a social construct, and that meaning is created by intersubjective triangulation of facts in a shared lebenswelt. To a neurotypical person, it may seem intuitively much more plausible that knowledge is based on a process of negotiation, in which different world views are emergent over the interests and agreements of different social groups. To the neurotypical person, knowledge is individually represented in the respective minds, but it is difficult to be thought of in isolation from a cultural and social environment.

In the most extreme case, the question is whether knowledge is the result of individual rational inquiry, but based on the sum of rational inquiries that have been amassed in a given cultural tradition, or whether knowledge is whatever a cultural tradition defines as true. Even in this stark contrast, the difference between these stances is subtle enough to be mostly perceived as one of culture, especially the culture of the hard sciences (STEM) and the culture of the social sciences. Surprisingly many hard scientists refuse to believe that social scientists might indeed think that they construct their reality entirely from the thin air of discourse, and at the same time, social scientists often have a hard time to imagine that scientists truly believe that they are a approximating an objective truth that presents itself outside any cultural agreement. To be fair, not all social scientists are social constructionists, and many scientists are not radical rationalists, and none of the moderates would deny that social and empirical influences play their role in shaping our knowledge.

Social constructionism is a radical stance, however. For a social constructionist, the social norm always shapes the individual preferences, whereas for a rationalist, individual preferences shape the adoption of social norms, which then become a part of individual preferences. Moreover, social constructionists tend to believe that knowledge is formed to account for preferences, and observations receive their semantics based on these preferences, whereas rationalists more or less think that knowledge receives its semantics from structural invariants in the observations, while culture and preference influence the shape of the model.

Social constructionism and rationalism are epistemological stances, and they give rises to different academic cultures, and these stances even inform how they construe each other. From a rationalist perspective, the preference between these stances appears to be even somewhat correlated with actual brain differences. If my rationalist (but potentially unpopular) theory is correct, then we may find that a majority of social constructionists are neurotypical people, and the variation and construction of their normativity is a direct result of their neurotypicality (i.e. their tendency to form opinions based on what they are being told), whereas a majority of rationalists are nerds, which usually form their opinions _despite_ what they are being told. From the social constructionist perspective, rationalism is the result of a particular normative agreement, i.e. somebody must have told the nerds to reject what they are being told, dissuaded the dissenters into dissidence, and made rationalists rationalize their tacit agreement to disagree with social constructionism.

This difference has an especially interesting implication for the respective notion of social constructionists and rationalist when it comes to gender. To a social constructionist, it may seem entirely plausible that gender is constructed as the result of behavioral patterns, gendered tropes and preferences that have been suggested by the environment. To a rationalist it may seem that it mostly results from innate preferences of the individual, which are then signaled to the environment by innate body language and behavioral traits, and by picking appropriate tropes from the local cultural repertoire. These hypotheses are not just of academic relevance, but have grave and conflicting normative implications. In a world where gender differences are reflected in structural inequality, social constructionists will want to change the social process of gender construction, by presenting children with different patterns and suggesting different preferences, and by changing the gendered tropes themselves. Rationalists may doubt the malleability of preferences, the suggestibility of behavioral patterns, and the detrimental effect of gendered tropes on individual success and happiness: If the preferences are innate and the tropes are merely a signal, then it does not really matter which tropes are chosen to announce one's gender to the social environment. In this view, injustice between different genders will have to be addressed on a legal, economical and cultural level, not by changing gender construction itself. Even if social constructionists and rationalists want to achieve justice between genders, they will clash in their ethical prescriptions, because the latter ones are perpetuating a faulty social construction process that leads to sexism, whereas the former want to oppress the free expression of innate gender preferences. Social constructionist feminists and rationalist feminists will be political enemies.