---
title: Controversies on Campus
tags: 
  - feminism
  - "Germaine Greer"
  - "safe spaces"
excerpt: "Students at Cardiff University try to 'no-platform' the feminist Germaine Greer, because her opinions make some students 'uncomfortable'. Is this justified?"
---

Last week, the notable writer and feminist [Germaine Greer](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Germaine_Greer) gave an invited lecture at Cardiff University, which sparked [fierce protest](http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/oct/23/petition-urges-cardiff-university-to-cancel-germain-greer-lecture) and thousands of signatures against her appearance, because Greer has repeatedly expressed the belief that biological males that identify as female and undergo surgery are not women. The fact that transgender people are suffering from vilification and discrimination does not change Greer's opinion and makes her point out that "old women" (such as herself) are a target of vilification and discrimination, too. Personally, I disagree with her position on trans people (without claiming competence on the subject), and agree with her position on discrimination against postmenopausal females (without claiming competence on the subject), but these details should be irrelevant for what stance I take towards her invitation as a public speaker.

[Ampersand](http://amptoons.com/blog/2015/11/21/greer-in-cardiff-follow-up) argues well for the point that student protests against Greer's appearance are a valid expression of free speech. She also agrees to some degree with the substance of the protest, namely that Greer's appearance expresses an honor the university bestowed on her, and it is correct to protest such an honorific if one does not consider the speaker to be honorable. Ampersand would have preferred if the students would not have emphasized the need for "no-platforming" Greer, and instead focused on the issue of the honorifics. Here I start disagreeing, because the front lines are different: Ampersand is of course right to emphasize the importance of allowing conflicts about whom we wish to honor (this implies a normative agreement to a position or achievements). But the protesters wished something else: they felt that Greer's opinion (even if her presentation would not concern trans issues) would make them feel unsafe and uncomfortable, and therefore Greer should not be listened to. This position is incompatible with the standards that academic discourse should be held to, and it makes the protests unacceptable in my view. It makes two implications that are not compatible with the values enabling rational discourse:

1. The validity of an entirely factual argument can be judged by the feelings of the audience. 
(Darwin's ideas were extremely offensive to his audience, but that was not indicative of their validity.)

2. Contributions of individuals are only valuable if that individual does not violate any norms of the current audience. (Kant held some arguably anti-semitic views, but that does not diminish his contributions to meta-physics and epistemology.)



Ampersand goes on to give a good argument for whom we should invite to debates in general: debates are valuable unless the argument is worthless, or the issue is "dead and settled" (such as Holocaust denial). Some of the commenters point out that the latter may only be obvious to people with a fixed opinion (no matter what the opinion is). Is the question whether trans women are women "dead and settled"?

Perhaps there is a proxy criterion for what we might consider "dead and settled" and what not: If there is a significant likelihood that a non-trivial and sincere subset of the audience will find the presented views interesting.

In the case of Germaine Greer, several points ought to be mentioned. She is not a real expert on transgender issues, and was not invited as one. Apparently, the topic only came up in the Q&A. It is disingenuous to expect a speaker to deny their sincerely held positions when directly asked, just because most of the audience does not share them. I think that intellectual integrity requires us to separate the contributions that a person makes from disagreements we hold in other areas.

But Greer makes trans people uncomfortable? That is terrible, but ultimately, I don't think that is a valid point. I am for ethical reasons a vegetarian, and I sincerely think that killing and eating mammals that may have the cognitive capabilities of very small children is horrible, and pretty much morally indefensible. It makes me deeply uncomfortable that factory farming and slaughterhouses exist, and that people eat the corpses produced there and even advocate it. I am not alone, every university holds a significant number of people that share my discomfort.

Some people might say that I am deluded for being a vegetarian, but whether a society converges on a corpse eater majority or a vegetarian majority is probably a cultural accident. I believe that I should not strive to no-platform corpse eaters, even those that strongly argue against vegetarianism. I also suspect that in a society that considers vegetarianism as the norm, most current corpse eaters would be reformed after a single extensive visit to a slaughterhouse. My position is less common, but more "normal" than theirs. Meanwhile, my discomfort with corpse eaters and opponents of vegetarianism is something that I have to resolve in private, with my therapist, or with my friends. If I cannot endure the presence of a corpse eater on stage, I am not fit for participating in that arena. If someone advocates eating meat, I would like to have to right to openly disagree. And if someone directly advocates against vegetarianism, and even makes fun of vegetarians, that does not mean that this person vilifies me personally.

I would like to go one step further now: I think that it is ok to have Greer speak about trans issues, too, as long as there is meaningful controversy in the audience. But Greer's position is obviously wrong?–Then we have nothing to worry about, because we have vastly better arguments and will prevail. We only need to worry if it is possible that there is truth to her position, and trans people are perhaps suffering indeed from a delusion, and the surgery is therefore unethical, because it won't do much to increase their quality of life and survival. Personally, I do not think that this is the case, but it also does not strike me as a position that no reasonable person can possibly hold. The fact that trans people feel distressed if someone thinks that they suffer from a delusion is in itself not a valid argument, because people that think that they are Napoleon will also feel distressed if someone maintains that they are delusional. Thus, if Greer is controversial, it makes even more sense to have this debate.

More generally, I think that academia cannot work without a free and open debate, grounded in civility and mutual respect. We must learn to value disagreement again. Safe spaces are important for people that need them, but they cannot become tools to suppress inconvenient opinions. Public arenas in academia must be be safe spaces for the free exchange of ideas, not for the identities and ideologies of social groups.