---
title: A possible root cause for narcissism?
---


It struck me that while we acknowledge that narcissism seems to be an almost incurable condition that wreaks havoc with the life of the narcissist too (i.e. does not serve them in any way), it is often not described as a medical problem, but pretty much as a moral failing. Since neither punishment nor stern words seem to reform the narcissist, that seems inadequate.

I wonder if we can identify a distinct mechanism instead. Could narcissism be the result of a partial social agnosia, for instance a lack of a mental mechanism to attach relevance to the desires of other people? In that case, it would of course follow that "normal" people do have an explicit mechanism for that, which does not seem implausible to me. As a result, narcissists would have a blind spot for what causes their social problems, and would not construe their social environment as a relational and transactional network, but a glove around their own persona. The apparent selfishness of the narcissist would simply be the symptom of his inability to muster attention for the needs of the people around them. In the absence of a mental representation of the needs of others, it will not easily enter the mind of the narcissist to reciprocate in social interaction, and thus his relationships to others will be unsustainable, because others will stop extending their goodwill. What is often seem as core parts of the condition, such as a addiction to admiration and attempts to manipulate and impress others could simply be the result of the unanswered needs for satisfying social interaction of the narcissist. The narcissist will naturally feel surrounded by hateful and hostile people, and perceive his problems as the result of a problematic environment.

It seems to me that narcissist are sufferers, too, and if the above idea is true, therapeutical approaches could focus on training the subject on compensation behaviors for their perceptual problems:
- Raise awareness for the fact that the subject possesses a blind spot that makes adequate world modeling difficult
- Explain the rational fact that societies are build on networks as exchanges (using diagrams and examples), which is implemented by a biological instinct for sharing and mutual care that may unfortunately be missing in the brain of the subject, due to no fault of their own. Ordinary people posses an urge to invest into their environment, which naturally leads to gratefulness and reciprocation, while the narcissist's intuition is that the goods in his possession are the defined by the difference of what he receives and what he gives away. This intuition seems to be entirely logical, but is misleading, because one receives practically everything from others, i.e. your gratifications are proportional to how much you invest, not to how much you hold on to.
- Offer a strategy that may alleviate social problems by compensating for the perceptual deficit and make sustained social interactions possible.
- Create a habit of explicitly noting down the social interaction partners, along with their current life situations, connections, goals and needs
- Encourage explicit reasoning about the current situation and goals of an interaction partner; ask what that partner is likely going to do next, and how they are going to respond to which kind of support
-