
# Trying to wrap my head around the nature of Mathematics


What is mathematics? What is the ontological status of mathematical truths (i.e. does Pythagoras' theorem exist)? What is the relationship between mathematics and the physical world, and of mathematics and cognition?

I am pretty clueless about the state of the debates among mathematicians, and what I am going to write reflects my current thoughts, so it is certainly not canonical and it is possible I am missing something, but lets see...

I used to find that suggestions like Nuñez' idea of a mathematics grounded in our cognitive access to the physical world, or Popper's idea that mathematics represents an ontological domain of existence, parallel to the physical and mental domains, do not convince me. To Nuñez I would reply that physical reality is a small murky puddle through which we swim in the shabby nutshell of our frail embodiment, and through which we wave the pathetic sieve of our sensory perception, capturing the few things that we get hold of in our conceptual apparatus. Mathematics, in contrast, is an infinite crystalline ocean that we navigate in the shabby nutshell of our comprehension, throwing out the brittle nets of our limited reason, and reeling into our conceptual apparatus whatever we manage to capture. To Popper, I say that all of mathematics is conditional, is only observable in potentia, based on axioms that are the irredeemable debt against which the internal causality of mathematics pays out its discoverable structures, so it does not make sense to treat mathematics as a "domain". Unlike Popper's mental and physical domain (which I also don't agree with, but it does not matter here), mathematics is not habitable.

So let us start our observation with what mathematics is not: it is not a cognitive phenomenon, it is not an implication of physics, and it is not an ontological domain. (Also, here, it is not a process of social negotiation of the most suitable axioms, or an institutional practice.) Most importantly, mathematics is for the most part entirely inaccessible to the human mind, because even with arbitrary augmentation through notebooks, pocket calculators, computers and scientific communities, the complexity of a statement that we can comprehend is finite (and relatively small), and the number of statements that we can examine throughout the lifetime of our civilization is finite (and also quite small).

Now what is it? I suggest that there might be two fundamental ways to capture mathematics (in the back of my mind, I am entirely aware that mathematicians must have come up with dozens, but for the purpose of my own little systemic comprehension, that does not matter). Simply put, mathematics is either axiomatic or computational. Axiomatic mathematics starts out with an empty chamber (well, actually with nothing at all), into which we throw a set of initial axioms that define a specification for what constitutes a valid expression, and the set of valid expressions constitutes a formal language. If we choose interesting axioms, we are rewarded with an infinite number of valid expressions. Because they are all implied by the axioms, they are all tautologies. Since Kurt Gödel, we also know that for every sufficiently interesting formal language, there are infinitely many statements for which we cannot find out whether they are valid. Axiomatic mathematics rests on specifications, and it not generally decidable.

The other mathematical kingdom is computational. It is built on states, and transitions between these states. The transitions are governed by a function that order these states, by matching each state to a successor state. Computational mathematics is based on implementations. We can define computation axiomatically, for instance as a Turing Machine (a strange formal language that is made up of a finite set of infinite vectors of characters, and a function that orders these vectors such that each vector only differs in one character, and the differing characters are adjacent, and the direction of the adjacency and the character difference corresponds to a transition table).
